Translated from DeepL.

CHAPTER III
THE KING OF MELLI KANKAN-MOUSA
Sultan Kankan-Mousa was the first of the kings of Melli
Melli who took over Songhai. Pious and equitable prince,
he was not equaled by any other king of Melli in virtue and
righteousness. He made the pilgrimage to the holy house of God
(Mecca) and made this journey in the early years of the ninth century of the Hegira; 
but God knows best the exact date.
The prince had with him a huge retinue and considerable forces
forces, for the number of his men amounted to sixty thousand.
sixty thousand. Whenever he mounted a horse, he was preceded by five hundred
preceded by five hundred slaves, each of them holding in his hand
hand a golden stick weighing 500 mitsqâls in gold.
Kankan-Mousa made his way to Oualàta in El-'Aouâli and
arrived at the present location of the Touật. There he left a large number
of his companions who had been affected during the
of a foot disease that, in their language, they called touát.
they called touát. The place where this separation took place
separation took place and where the sick people made their home, took the
name of their illness.
In their anuals, the peoples of the East have recounted
the journey of the prince; they marked their astonishment of the
power of his empire, but they did not depict 
Kankan-Mousa as a large and generous man. It is
that in fact, in spite of the extent of his states, he only gave in
alms in the two holy cities only a sum of
20.000 gold coins, whereas Askia-El-Hâdj-Mohammed
devoted 100.000 gold coins to the same object.
It was after the departure of Kankan-Mousa, going to the
pilgrimage, that the people of Songhaï submitted to his
authority. On his return, the prince passed through the Songhaï and
built, outside the city of Kâgho, a mosque with mihrab
with mihrab where he made the Friday prayer. This mosque
still exists today. In all the localities where he spent a Friday
spent one Friday, the prince had been accustomed to proceed
in this way.
Then Kankan-Mousa took the road to Timbuktu; he seized this city
took that city and was the first ruler to take control of it.
made master of it. He installed a representative of his authority there
and built the royal palace, called Ma-dougou, words whose meaning in their language is palace of the king. 
On the site, still well known from this palace, were established the
stores of the butchers.

Translated with www.DeepL.com/Translator (free version)