Direct translation from Arabic to English:
This is a machine translation produced by Google Translate directly  from the Arabic passage in selectedPassages.txt.

It appears that the indirect translation (the machine translation from the French translation into English,
located in Fra2Eng.txt) is a better translation. I tested other machine translations for Arabic, but they
seemed to produce even poorer results than Google.

And he began to ask the working scholars about the Sunnah
The Messenger of God, may God’s prayers and peace be upon him, followed their sayings, may God have mercy on him, 
until all the scholars of his time agreed that he was a caliph, and from whom Sheikh Abd al-Rahman al-Suyuti, 
Sheikh Muhammad ibn Abd al-Karim al-Mughili, and Sheikh Shamhroosh al-Khubi and al-Sharif al-Husna agreed, 
Mawla al-Abbas, the Emir of Mecca, may God have mercy on everyone, 1 and establish rights for Muslims. 
On himself, he commanded the people of Morquer to marry as they wished, so their children would follow them, 
and he is present so far. His blessing has not changed, may God have mercy on him, and he gave Sharif Ahmed 
Al-Safly to the district of villages and Algeria. As for Sharif Al-Husna Moulay Al-Abbas, he was with the 
Commander of the Faithful and the Caliph of the Muslims. Aski Hajj Muhammad, sitting in the shoes of the Kaaba, 
they were talking to Al-Abbas. O this, you are the eleventh of the caliphs who mentioned the Messenger of God, 
may God’s prayers and peace be upon him, but you came as a king, and the king and the caliphate do not agree.
So he said to him, How is that, my master? So my master Al-Abbas said to him, There is no way to do that except 
for you to get out of what you are in. So he submitted to him. He voluntarily surrendered and expelled all the 
ministers from him and collected all the instruments and funds of the Sultanate and made all of that in the 
hands of Al-Abbas and he sat in isolation for himself. On Friday, Aski called Hajj Muhammad and made him sit 
in the mosque of the honorable town of Mecca, and he put on his head a green cap and a white turban, and gave 
him a sword, and the congregation who attended testified that he is the caliph of the land of Takrur.
And that everyone who opposes him in that land has disobeyed God Almighty and His Messenger. Then Haji Muhammad 
prepared to return. When he arrived in Egypt, he found Sheikh Abd al-Rahman al-Suyuti there. Asked him about 
the caliphs whom the Messenger of God, may God’s prayers and peace be upon him, mentioned that they would come 
after him, so the sheikh said, “They are twelve, five of them in Medina.” and two in Egypt 
And one in the Levant and two in Iraq, and all of these have passed, and two remain in the land of Takrurant. 
One of them will come after you. The second will come. Your tribe is affiliated with a troop of the people of 
Yemen. And your dwelling in Coco, you are the disciple of Mansour Adel, a lot of joy, giving and charity.