This file will contain selected passages from the automatic translation (via DeepL)
of the French translation of Tarikh al-Fattash. 
Passages are titles and labeled for reference within the original source.
The English parts here have been corrected by removing reptitions, page numbers, and footnotes/commentary.

Arabic text on HathiTrust: https://hdl.handle.net/2027/hvd.hndhq3
French text on HathiTrust: https://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89012185690 and https://hdl.handle.net/2027/ien.35556012109526

PASSAGE 1
Original Arabic: Pages 18-19 of the Arabic text on HathiTrust, lines lines 95-123 in 
\TimbuktuChronicles\data\corrections\tarikh-al-fattash-ara-pgs15-31-corrected.txt

French Translation: 
Starting from line 959 in TimbuktuChronicles\tarikh-al-fattash-fra1.txt, starting from line 959.


He also decided to consult the practicing ulama about
the traditions of the Messenger of God (God shower his blessings and
blessings and salvation upon him!) and to follow their
recommendations: God have mercy on him! Therefore, all the
all the scholars of his time agreed that he was a true 
that he was a true Khalifa.
Among those who made this statement about him, it is worth mentioning
Sheikh Abderrahman Es-Soyoûti, Sheikh Mohammed ben Abdelûti, and
Sheikh Mohammed ben Abdelkerîm El-Meghîli, the Sheikh
Chamharoûch of the race of the geniuses and the hassanide sheriff
Moulaï El-Abbas, prince of Mecca: God have mercy on them all!
He granted rights to the Muslims and imposed on them marks of respect towards his person. He decided
that the people of Móri-koiras should marry whomever they wished and
that the children born of these unions would be of the same condition
as their fathers, a rule that is still in force today and 
has not been modified, thanks to the favor with which God
God have mercy on this prince! He gave
to the sheriff Ahmed Es-Seqli' the territory surrounding the 
villages and islands.
The Hassanid sheriff Moulaï El-Abbàs was one day with the prince of the believers, 
the khalife of the Moslems, the askia
El-hâdj Mohammed, sitting near the Ka'ba, and both were talking 
together: said to the askia, "O you who are here," said the sheriff Moulaï El-Abbâs, 
"you are the eleventh of the khalifes of whom
of whom the Envoy of God spoke (God shower his blessings on him and grant him
blessings and salvation upon him!); but you came to us as a king, 
and one cannot combine the two titles
of king and khalifa. -- How then, my lord?
asked the askia. -- There is only one way, replied
Moulaï El-Abbâs, it is that you leave your current condition".
The askia accepted this proposal and, after having removed
all his ministers, he gathered all his royal insignia and treasures, 
gave everything into the hands of El-Abbâs and
thus found himself deposed by himself. Moulaï El-Abbâs 
then locked himself up in the retreat during three days, then he left it 
came out of it on Friday, convened the askia El-Hadj Mohammed and
and made him sit in the mosque of the noble city of Mecca.
Then he put on his head a green cap and a white turban,
gave him a sword and took the crowd of the assistants as witnesses
that he instituted him khalife for the country of Tekroûr and that 
whoever disobeyed his orders in this country would disobey God
God the Most High and his Messenger.
Then the askia El-Hâdj Mohammed prepared to return 
in his States. When he arrived in Cairo, he met Sheikh
Abderrahman Es-Soyoûti and asked him about the Khalifes 
of whom the Messenger of God (God shower his
blessings and salvation upon him!)
to come after him.
The sheikh replied: "There should be twelve, 
five in Medina, two in Cairo, one in Syria and two in Iraq.
all of them have already reigned; there are still two to come,
who will reign in the land of Tekroûr: 
you are one of these two and the other will come after you. Your family is related
to the Tôrodo', who descend from the people of Yemen, and your 
residence will be Gaogao. You will be well led, victorious 
equitable, very happy, very liberal and very charitable.

Translated with www.DeepL.com/Translator (free version)