Indirect Translation: from the French translation of the Arabic to English.

This is a machine translation produced by www.deepl.com/translator of the French translation passage in 
selectedPassagesFrench.txt.

It is overall a good translation; the only issue is that some phrases seem to be repeated for 
some reason even though they do not appear to be repeated in the original French translation. (Is this 
because of the awkward line breaks in the Arabic version?) But that is a minor issue that can be easily fixed.


He also decided to consult the practicing ulama about
the traditions of the Messenger of God (God shower his blessings and
blessings and salvation upon him!) and to follow their
recommendations: God have mercy on him! Therefore, all the
all the scholars of his time agreed that he was a true 
that he was a true Khalifa.
Among those who made this statement about him, it is worth mentioning
Sheikh Abderrahman Es-Soyoûti, Sheikh Mohammed ben Abdelûti, and
Sheikh Mohammed ben Abdelkerîm El-Meghîli, the Sheikh
Chamharoûch of the race of the geniuses and the hassanide sheriff
Moulaï El-Abbas, prince of Mecca: God have mercy on them
God have mercy on them all!
He granted rights to the Muslims and imposed on them
He granted rights to the Muslims and imposed on them marks of respect towards his person. He decided
that the people of Móri-koiras should marry whomever they wished and that
that the children born of these unions would be of the same condition
as their fathers, a rule that is still in force today and 
today and has not been modified, thanks to the favor with which God
God have mercy on this prince! He gave
to the sheriff Ahmed Es-Seqli' the territory surrounding the 
villages and islands.
The Hassanid sheriff Moulaï El-Abbàs was one day with the prince of the believers
with the prince of the believers, the khalife of the Moslems, the askia
El-hâdj Mohammed, sitting near the Ka'ba, and both were talking
were talking together: "O you who are here, said to the askia the
to the askia, "O you who are here," said the sheriff Moulaï El-Abbâs, "you are the eleventh of the khalifes of whom
of whom the Envoy of God spoke (God shower his blessings on him and grant him
blessings and salvation upon him!); but you came to us as a king
but you came to us as a king, and one cannot combine the two titles
of king and khalifa. -- How then, my lord?
asked the askia. -- There is only one way, replied
Moulaï El-Abbâs, it is that you leave your current condition".
The askia accepted this proposal and, after having removed
all his ministers, he gathered all his insignia and his royal 
his royal insignia and treasures, gave everything into the hands of El-Abbâs and
thus found himself deposed by himself. Moulaï El-Abbâs 
then locked himself up in the retreat during three days, then he left it 
came out of it on Friday, convened the askia El-Hadj Mohammed and
and made him sit in the mosque of the noble city of Mecca.
Then he put on his head a green cap and a white turban,
gave him a sword and took the crowd of the assistants as witnesses
that he instituted him khalife for the country of Tekroûr and that 
whoever disobeyed his orders in this country would disobey God
God the Most High and his Messenger.
Then the askia El-Hâdj Mohammed prepared to return 
in his States. When he arrived in Cairo, he у met Sheikh
Abderrahman (13) Es-Soyoûti and asked him about the Khalifes 
about the Khalifes of whom the Messenger of God (God shower his blessings on
blessings and salvation upon him!
to come after him.
The sheikh replied: "There should be twelve, five of them in Medina, two in the Cairo and one in the Cairo.
five in Medina, two in Cairo, one in Syria and two in Iraq.
all of them have already reigned; there are still two to come,
who will reign in the land of Tekroûr: you are one of these two
you are one of these two and the other will come after you. Your family is related
to the Tôrodo', who descend from the people of Yemen, and your 
residence will be Gaogao. You will be well led, victorious 
equitable, very happy, very liberal and very charitable.

Translated with www.DeepL.com/Translator (free version)