CHAPTER XIII
ASKIA-EL-HADJ-MOHAMMED
The son of Sonni-'Ali, Abu-Bekr-Da'ou, was proclaimed soul-governor 
in the city of Donogha'. As soon as the very fortunate,
the very orthodox Mohammed-ben-Abou-Bekr-Et-Touri, or,
according to other authors, Es-Sellenki, one of the principal 
generals of Sonni-Ali, learned this news, he conceived the
to seize the sovereign power and, with this aim,
he combined many means of action. As soon as he had
finished arranging the network of his machinations, he set out
at the head of all his partisans and went to attack the city
of which we have just spoken, on the night of the 
1st of the month of djomada I of this year (February 18, 1493). 
But, his troops were routed, Mohammed fled
and did not stop until he had reached the village of Ankogho
which is close to Kâgho. He stayed in this village to gather his troops
and had a new meeting with his adversary in this place, on Monday, 
14 of the month of djomada I (March 3, 1493). The combat started with a great violence; 
the fight was so terrible and the action so deadly 
that all almost succumbed. Finally, God
gave the victory to the very fortunate, the very orthodox 
Mohammed-ben-Abou-Bekr and Sonni-Abou-Bekr-Da'ou fled to
Abar, where he remained until his death.
As a result of this victory, the very wealthy, the very orthodox Mohammed 
became master of the supreme power, prince of the Believers, khalifa of the Muslims.
On hearing this news, the daughters of Sonni-'Ali had cried out: "Askia,
an expression which, in their language, means: "he is not! "
When this was reported to Muhammad, he ordered
that no other nickname than this expression be given to him,
and that he be called Askia-Mohammed.
God thus delivered the Muslims from their anguish; he used the new
the new prince to put an end to the misfortunes and
the troubles they were suffering from. Askia-Mohammed deployed,
indeed, the greatest zeal to fortify the community
and to improve the fate of its members. He frequented 
the doctors and asked them for advice on what it was the governmental affairs.
The population which, during the reign of the Karedi Sonni-Ali, 
was entirely called to the service of the weapons, was
henceforth divided into two categories: the army and the people.
The prince sent first of all to the preacher 'Omar the order
to bring El-Mokhtår-ben-Mohammed-Naddi out of prison
and to bring him to him so that he could restore him in his functions.
The preacher answered that El-Mokhtår was dead; but,
according to some accounts, he was the one who hastened to
to kill the prisoner at that time. Then the prince
of Biro 'Omar, the brother of El-Mokhtir, and invested him
in the place of his brother of the functions of Timbuktu-Koi.
At the end of the year 899 (1494), Askia-Mohammed seized Zâgha 
by the intermediary of his brother the Kourmina-Fàri", 
"Amar-Komzâgho; that same year, he fought to Bakar-Magha.
In the second year of the tenth century, in the month of safar (October 21 - November 19)
if I am not mistaken, he left to perform the pilgrimage to Mecca. 
He visited the sacred temple surrounded by a group of notables taken from each of the tribes.
Among the notables who accompanied the prince was the saint of God, Mour-Sâlih-Djaura 
(God have mercy on him and let us benefit from his influence in this world and in the other!). 
Of Akori origin, he was born in Tauta-allah, city located on the territory of Tendirma. 
During the journey of the journey, the prince could judge the influence of the sheikh. 
Between Mecca and Cairo, the simoun blew with such violence that the water supply evaporated completely. 
We were about to die of heat and thirst.
The prince then sent to Mour to implore God to give them water and to invoke in his prayer 
the patronage of the Prophet (may God shower his blessings on him and his blessings and grant him salvation). 
The holy person shook the messenger and said to him:
"The Prophet's patronage is too high to be made to intervene in earthly matters." 
Then he addressed a prayer to God and immediately a large shower of water to drink as they wished.
The prince had taken with him a body of troops of 1.500 men: 500 horsemen and 1.000 infantrymen. 
Among his companions were: his son Askia-Mousa, the Hoco-Koraï-Koï' 'Ali-Folen, etc. 
The funds which he had taken along amounted to 300.000 gold coins. This sum had
taken from the preacher 'Amar and was part of the treasure entrusted to him by Sonni Ali. 
As for the money that Sonni-Ali had in his palace, it had disappeared without anything ever being found.
Askia-Mohammed performed the rites of the pilgrimage to Mecca and visited the holy places. 
All those whom God appointed to accompany him also made the pilgrimage at the end of that same year. 
The blessed seyyid, Mour-Salih-Djaura, addressed the most fervent prayers in favor of 'Amar-Komzâgho, 
the brother of the prince. 'Amar, who had to direct the affairs of the empire, had for Mour the most
lively affection; he rendered him many services 
and treated him with the greatest deference.
On the funds which he had taken, the prince took a sum of
of 100.000 gold coins which he gave as alms to the two
holy cities, then he bought in Medina a garden
that he constituted waqf in favor of the people of Sudan; this garden
is well known there. The expenses of maintenance amounted to
100,000 gold coins and 100,000 gold coins were used to buy goods and 
other things that the prince needed.
In these blessed regions, Askia-Mohammed met the
the noble Abbasid khalifa and asked him to appoint him
as his lieutenant for the country of Songbaï. The khalif
acquiesced to his desire, inviting him to relinquish his authority 
for three days and to come then to find him the fourth day.
When this happened, the Khalifa
declared Askia-Mohammed his lieutenant by placing on his head
on his head a cap and a turban and thus made him a true
lieutenant of Islam.  
Askia-Mohammed had occasion to see, in these regions,
a great number of Moslem doctors and holy people, among
sonnages, among them El-Djelål-Es-Soyouti (God have mercy on him!). He questioned them on various 
points relating to his and obtained from them reasoned answers.
He also asked them to pray for him and he felt the effects of their blessings.
In the third year of the century, he returned from his pilgrimage
and entered Kâgho in the month of dzoul-hiddja, the
last month of that year (31 July-30 August 1497).
God favored the reign of Askia-Mohammed, he assured him
great conquests and covered him with his brilliant protection. 
This prince took over the whole country of Kounta up to the Atlantic Ocean
on the western side and his authority
extended from the border of the country of Bindoko to Teghazzó
and its dependencies. All these peoples he subdued by the sword and by
force, as we will see in the account of these
these expeditions. God accomplished everywhere what this prince
desired, so that Askia-Mohammed was as obediently 
in all his states as in his own palace.
+ Everywhere there was abundance and absolute peace.  
Praise be to Him who favors whomever he pleases in the way that pleases him; He possesses the supreme goodness.
In the year 903 (August 1497-August 1498) he undertook an
expedition against Na'asira, the sultan of Mossi. He took with him
the blessed seyyid, Mour-Sâlih-Djaura, inviting him to
to give him the necessary indications so that this expedition
was a true holy war made in the way of God.
Mour did not refuse to comply with this order and explained
to the prince all the rules pertaining to the holy war.
The prince of the Believers, Askia-Mohammed, then asked the
seyyid to be his messenger near the sultan of Mossi. The
seyyid accepted this mission; he went to the country of Mossi
and gave the letter of his master who summoned the sultan to embrace Islamism.
Before answering, the sultan of Mossi declared that he wanted 
first of all to consult his ancestors who were in
the other world. Consequently, accompanied by his ministers, 
he went to the temple of the idol of the country. For his part
the seyyid also went there in order to see how the dead were
They began by the customary offerings; then an elderly man appeared.
At the sight of him everyone prostrated themselves; then
the sultan announced the object of his approach. Speaking then
in the name of the ancestors, the old man said: "I will never accept 
such a thing for you. You must, on the contrary,
fight until you or they have succumbed to the last."
Then Naʻasira answered the blessed seyyid: "Go back to
your master and tell him that between him and us there can be nothing
there can be nothing but fighting and combat. 
"He was left alone in the temple with the personage who had appeared in the form of an old man, 
the seyyid addressed him in these terms: "In the name of the mighty God, I ask you to say who you are?"
"I am Iblis," replied the pseudo-old man, "I am leading them astray so that I mislead them 
so that they all die in a state of infidelity."
Mour returned to the prince Askia-El-Ilàdj-Mohammed and gave him an account of all that had happened. 
"Now," he added, "your duty is to fight them." 
Immediately the prince began to fight with them; he killed many men, devastated
their fields, sacked their dwellings, and took their children and took their children captive. 
All those, men and women, who were brought back as captives, were the object of the divine blessing.
In the whole region, no other expedition, apart from this one, 
had the character of a holy war made in the way of God.
That year the cadi Habib died (God have mercy on him!). 
The prince then entrusted the duties of cadi to sheikh-el-islâm, the father of blessings, Mahmud,
who thus became cadi of Timbuktu and the territory of this city.
One of my colleagues, in whom I have complete confidence, told me that he had
received a report from the chief of the Muslims, the jurisconsult Mohammed-ben-Ahmed-Baghyo'o (God protect him!), 
that it was the jurisconsult Abu-Bekr, son of the cadi El-Ilay, who
encouraged Askia-El-Hàdj-Mohammed to choose, for the post of cadi, the jurisconsult Mahmud. This young man," 
he told him, "is a pious and blessed person." The appointment was immediately made. 
Here ends what the sheikh ou'akori told me: The jurisconsult El-Mokhtår, the grammarian, 
the maternal uncle of Mahmud, was, at that time, absent from Timbuktu. On his return, 
he reproached very strongly the the jurisconsult Abu-Bekr for the designation he had made. 
"Why, he said to him, have you indicated my nephew? 
Do you not have a son worthy of fulfilling the functions of cadi? Why didn't you appoint him?" 
At that time, the father of the blessed, Mahmud, was thirty-five years old; 
he exercised for fifty-five years and died at the age of ninety (God have mercy on him!).
When he was appointed cadi, Mahmud was imam of Sankore. 
He resigned this last function towards the end of his life and invested his maternal cousin, the jurisconsult, 
Imam Anda-Ag-Mohammed, son of El-Mokhtar, the grammarian.
From that moment on he ceased to preside over the prayer; 
he made an exception only on the day of the death of the saint of God, Sidi Aboul-Qasem-Et-Touâti 
and during that of Fayyâd-El-Ghedâmsi (God have mercy on them!). 
In these two circumstances he presided over the prayer.
On the return from this expedition against Na'asira, the prince
Askia-Mohammed camped in Touya during the month of Ramadan (12 April - 12 May 1498).
During the fifth year of the xth century (19 August 1498 - 8 August 1499), 
Askia-El-Hàdj-Mohammed went to the Tendirma where he seized the Bâghena-Fâri, 'Ostman and killed Dinba-Donbi, 
the Fulani. In the sixth year (8 August 1499 - 28 July 1500) he undertook an expedition against
Ayar and forced Tildza to come under his authority.
During the seventh year (July 28, 1500 - July 17, 1501) he sent his brother 'Amar-Komzàgho to Zalen 
to fight Qâma-Fiti-Qalli, caïd of the sultan of Melli, who was in command in this city. 
The caïd defended himself successfully. 'Amar, having been unable to achieve any result 
informed the prince of the situation and went to camp with his army in Tenfiren, 
city close to Zalen on the eastern side. It was there that one
son of 'Amar, 'Otsmàn, who was nicknamed Tenfiren.
The prince went in person to attack Qàma-Fiti-Qalli; he defeated him, sacked the city, 
plundered the palace of the sultan of Melli and took his family captive. 
Among the captives was Meryem-Dâbo who was the mother of Ismail, son of Askia-El-Hadj-Moharnmed. 
After having remained some time in this region in order to improve the situation of the country 
and to organize it on new bases, the prince returned on his steps.
As for the people of Dienné, they had voluntarily submitted
as soon as the prince had ascended the throne.
During the eighth, ninth and tenth years (July 17, 1501 - June 14, 1504), there were no expeditions. 
At the beginning of the eleventh (June 14, 1504-June 4, 1505) the prince undertook the expedition of Berko 
which is also called Berbou. It was during this campaign that was taken
as captive Zârakor'-Banki, who became mother of Askia-Mousa, 
one of the sons of the prince. In the battle which took place at this time, a great number of the best and 
most valiant Zà-Bir-Benda of them. Seeing this, Amar-Komzâgho, the brother of the
prince, could not hold back his tears and exclaimed: "So you want the ruin of Songhai."  
"No," replied Askia-el-Hâdj-Mohammed; "I want on the contrary its prosperity. All these
people whom you have just seen succumb would have made life difficult for us in Songhaï 
if they had remained with us. It was not possible for us to treat them ourselves
as they have just been, that is why I brought them here so that they 
might be decimated and that we might be rid of them. I knew well that here they could not escape death."
These words dispelled 'Amar's grief and calmed his despair.
At this time the jurisconsult Mohammed was born, son of the
father of blessings, the cadi, the jurisconsult Mahmud (God have mercy on them!). 
The twelfth year (June 4, 1505 - May 24, 1506) passed without any expeditions. 
In the thirteenth year (May 24, 1506 - May 13, 1507) the prince undertook the campaign against Kilanbout 
which is Melli. In the fifteenth year (May 2, 1508 - April 21, 1509), the sheikh-el-Islam, 
the cadi Mahmud-ben-'Omar, went on a pilgrimage to Mecca. 
During his absence, he had himself replaced: 
in his functions of imam, by his maternal uncle, the jurisconsult El-Mokhtàr, the grammarian; 
in his functions of cadi, by the cadi 'Abderrahman-ben-Abou-Bekr,
He followed in that the orders of Askia-El-Hàdj-Mohammed. He
returned from the pilgrimage on the 27th of the month of Sha'ban
of the sixteenth year of the tenth century (December 10, 1509). As he arrived at
Kàgho, the prince, who at that time was in the well-known
port of Kabara, having learned this news, embarked on a ship
on a ship and went to meet Mahmud until he reached Kàgho where he joined him.
The father of blessings, Mahmud, then resumed his march to Timbuktu; 
he returned to that city and went home in perfect health. 
Many people in Timbuktu believed that he was going to give up his duties as imam
to his maternal uncle, El-Mokhtar; but this was not the case and at the time of the dohor, 
the very day of his arrival, he went to the mosque and presided over the prayer.
As for the cadi Abderrahman he continued to exercise his
functions of cadi, without that, during ten years, the jurisconsult
Mahmud did not speak to him about anything. After this period of time the sheikh Ahmed Bibokor' 
informed the prince of the situation. 
This one sent a messenger to Timbuktu at once to give the order to
the cadi `Abderrahman the order to leave this city and
and to hand over his service to the jurisconsult, Cadi Mahmud. 
He left immediately and Mahmud resumed his seat as a magistrate.
This event had an epilogue: A discussion occurred later on following an exchange 
a discussion occurred later following an exchange of words between the cadi Mohammed-ben-Ahmed, 
son of the cadi Abderrahman, and Nefa'a, son of Timbuktu-Koi, El-Moustafa-Koraï 
and the small son of Sheikh Ahmed-Bibokor. 
As the cadi Mohammed showed himself very aggressive, Nefa'a said to him: 
"All this comes from the ancient enmity that existed between our forefathers, because
my grandfather, the sheik Ahmed, denounced to the prince
the conduct of your grandfather, the cadi Abderrahman, which
caused his dismissal. That is why you are angry with us."
In the seventeenth year (10 April 1510-31 March 1511), the sent the Hoco-Korai-Koi, 
'Ali-Folen and the Belma'a, Mohammed-Karai, to the Baghena-Faran, Ma'-Qoto-Kotya.
During the eighteenth year (31 March 1511 - 19 March 1512)
Askia-El-Iâdj-Mohammed undertook his expedition against the cursed, false prophet, Tayenda, 
and killed him in Zàra. 
The circumstances wanted that, at this moment, Kalo, the eldest son
of Tayenda, was on an expedition and absent from his father's army.
When he learned what had just happened to his father, he cursed him, fled with the troops he had with him
and took refuge in Fouta, the name of a country near the Atlantic Ocean and belonging to the Sultan of Djolf.
He remained in this place and, after having planned a treason against the sultan, 
he succeeded in seizing his person and put him to death. 
Since then the country of Djolf was divided into two parts: one half, over which Kalo reigned,
son of Salta-Tayenda, and the other half had as its ruler 
Domel, the main caid of the Sultan of Djolf.
Kalo became a powerful sultan with considerable forces and the kingdom he founded still exists today.
The populations of Djolf are Sudanese. At his death, Kalo
had as successor his son Yoroyim. When the latter died, he was replaced by Kalaya-Tabâra, 
an eminent man, good, just and whose equity reached such a degree that,
in the whole of the West, he had no equal, if we except
for the sultan of Melli, Kankan-Mousa (God
have mercy on them all!) After the death of Kalaya,
his nephew Kota, son of Yoroyim, succeeded him and when he
and when he died, he was succeeded by his brother Sanba-Lâm. 
He forbade all iniquity and tolerated none. 
He reigned for thirty-seven years. At his death, his son Abu-Bekr took the power 
and it is he who still exercises it today.
OBSERVATION. - Tayenda-Salta-Yâlelba, 
Nima-Salta-Ourarbi, Doko-Salta-Firouhi and Kada-Salta-Oularbi, originally from the
of the Djolf tribe, located in the territory of Melli, left their country and went to settle 
in the territory of Qayaka. When Askia-El-Hâdj-Mohammed had killed the cursed one,
they all migrated to Fouta and settled there. They are still there today.
As for the Djolf, they are the best of men: by their acts
in their actions and in their character they differ essentially from all the other Fulani. 
God, by special grace, has endowed them with a generous temperament and inspires them with
beautiful deeds and praiseworthy conduct.
In the area where they are established today, they have considerable power and 
power and authority. For valor and and bravery they have no equal. 
Finally, according to what we have heard reported, loyalty and fidelity to
commitments are, so to speak, innate in them and reach their apogee.
At the end of the nineteenth year (March 19, 1512 - March 9, 1513), the prince made an expedition to Kachena; 
he returned in the month of rebi' I of the twentieth year (May 7 - June 6, 1513).
Towards the end of the twenty-first year (February 26, 1514 - February 15, 1515) 
he undertook an expedition to Kachena against El-Odala, sultan of Agadez', 
and ended it during the twenty-second year (February 15, 1515-February 5, 1516); 
at the time of his return, Kotal, chief of Liki and nicknamed Konta, rebelled against him.
Here is the cause of this revolt: Konta, while returning with the prince from his expedition against Agadez, had
hoped to receive his share of the booty that had been made upon his arrival in his country.
This hope having been disappointed, he spoke of this affair to the Dendi-Fâri' and the latter answered him:
"If you address a claim of this kind to the prince, you will be treated as a rebel." 
Konta did not reply; then his companions having come to them and having said to him: 
"Where is our share of the booty? We do not have it yet Why don't you claim it?" 
He answered them: "I asked for it and the Dendi-Fâri assured me that if I persisted in
claiming it, I would be treated as a rebel. But I do not want to be treated alone as a rebel; join with me
and then I will claim." "Well," they cried, "we will be treated as rebels as well as you." 
"Thank you," he replied, "that is all I wanted from you."
Thereupon Konta went to the Dendi-Fâri; he renewed his request and was refused. 
The revolt broke out at once; in a great battle which the rebels fought against the prince's troops, 
they held their ground, they held up their adversaries and ceased from then on to recognize 
the authority of Askia-El-Hådj-Mohammed. 
This situation lasted until the end of the dynasty of the Songhai people and Konta retained its independence.
An expedition against him in the twenty-third year (5 February 1516 - 24 January 1517) did not produce any results.
In the twenty-fourth year (24 January 1517 - 13 January 1518), the prince was forced to leave the country.
The prince sent his brother the Kormina-Fâri, 'Omar, against Qâma-Fatiya; 'Omar killed Qâma. 
In the twenty-fifth year, on the 15th of Ramadan (September 20, 1518) 
Askia-El-Hâdj-Mohammed camped in Kabara.
His brother 'Omar-Komzâgho died in the twenty-sixth year,
the 3rd of the month of rebi' I (March 5, 1519). Because of this event, Mur-Saliah-Djaura remained 
three days without showing himself in public. He then left his house and, as soon as he arrived at the
the medrasa, he said to the students: "On this day, the 
Lord has left (in peace) 'Omar and has forgiven him." 'Omar
had for the seyyid a most lively affection; he often did him favors 
and treated him with the greatest respect.
The prince, who at that time was in Sankiya village situated behind Koukiya on the side of Dendi, 
entrusted to Yahya, his brother, the functions of Kormina-Fâri.
This one kept his functions nine years and died during the revolt of
of the Fâr-Mondzo, Mousa, at the time when he revolted
against his father, the prince Askia-El-Hâdj-Mohammed.
In the twenty-eighth year (12 December 1520 - 1 December 1521), 'Omar-ben-Abou-Bekr died, 
the sultan of Timbuktu. In the thirty-first year (10 November 1523 - 29 October 1524) 
the prince sent his brother Faran-Yahya to Kozara where the Binka-Farma died, 
Ali-Yamra. When Faran-Yahya returned, he sent 'Ali-Folen to Binka to bring back 
the estate of the deceased Binka-Farma, Ali-Yarma, and he asked the prince to appoint 
Binka-Farma his son Bella, then Adiki-Farma. The prince consented.
Bella, although one of the youngest children of Faran-Yahya, was distinguished from his brothers by his 
courage and valour. As soon as his elder brothers heard of his appointment, 
they were very irritated and swore to burst his drum the day he came to Kâgho. 
The dignity conferred on Bella was high in the governmental hierarchy and
the one who exercised it was one of the persons entitled to the drum.
All of Bella's brothers, except the Fâri-Mondzo Mousa, who was the eldest of all, 
did not cease to show their jealousy by insulting words against him. 
When Bella cut knowledge of all these remarks, he swore in his turn to burst
the buttocks of anyone who wanted to puncture his drum. Then he went to Kâgho and beat the drum before him.
Arrived at a certain well-known place near the city, 
which marked the limit at which all the drums had
to stop beating, except only that of the prince, Bella gave the order
to his men not to interrupt their battery as long
they had not arrived at the door of the prince's palace.
All the characters of the army which, according to the etiquette
had to go to the meeting of a dignitary of the rank 
of Bella, went up on horseback to go to receive it, and,
among them, were the brothers who had sworn to burst the
drum. When the two groups were in presence, those
who, according to the ceremonial, were supposed to dismount to salute
except the Fâri-Mondzo Mousa; he saluted, but remaining on horseback and making only a slight 
nod, then he said: "I did not say anything, because you know that if
had I promised to do something, I would surely have kept my word!"
No one, however, was able to show their hostility against Bella. The enmity that his brothers concurred
against him had no other origin than his elevation 
to a high dignity and also the superiority which he showed on them
in the fights and on the battlefields where he made himself by his audacity.
The situation became such that Mousa turned away from his
duties towards his father. He was irritated with him and felt hatred for both 
the prince and his faithful servant and adviser 'Ali-Folen, 
the mutual understanding and assistance being perfect between these two characters. 
He claimed that the prince did nothing without obeying the prescriptions of his advisor.
At the end of his reign, Askia-El-Hâdj-Mohammed became blind, but nobody knew it, 
because 'Ali-Folen was always near him and never left him. 
However, following the threats of Mousa, who had sworn to kill him, Ali-Folen, 
seized with fear, fled to Tendirma and took refuge with the Kormina-Fâri, Yahya, 
in the year thirty-fourth (October 8, 1526 - September 27, 1527).
It was in the thirty-fifth year (September 27, 1527-September 1528) that the Fâri-Mondzo, Mousa, revolted.
He left with some of his brothers to go to
Koukiya. The prince then mandated his brother Faran-Yahya,
who was in Tendirma, to come and put an end to the activities
of all these young people. Yahya went to the prince,
who enjoined him to go to Koukiya to find the rebels and
and urged him not to be too cruel to them.
As soon as he arrived in Koukiya, Yahya had to fight against the rebels who received him with their weapons in hand. 
Wounded in this encounter, he fell into the power of his adversaries; he was
on the ground with his face down and stripped of his clothes.
It was in this position that he spoke to the rebels
of the fate that threatened them. Meanwhile, Daoud, the prince's son, stood at the head of the
of the prince, was standing at the head of the wounded, with his brother
Ismaïl and Mohammed-Benkan-Kirya, son of Omar-Komzâgho. 
The latter told his two companions that all this was just talk and lies,
Yahya exclaimed: "How can Mârou-Benkan-Kirya," - this was the diminutive of his name in their language - 
"it is you who dare to accuse me of lying! And do you think that here you will never
you will never again hear of it, O you who sow division among parents?" 
Then, as Ismail had covered him with a piece of cloth, he said to him: 
"O Ismail, I knew well that you were the only one
capable of doing such a thing, because you are one of those who
help bring families together." 
Then Yahya breathed his last and the prince raised to the dignity of
Kormina-Fâri, his son 'Otsmân-Youbabo.
Mousa returned with his brothers to Kâgho, then 
the end of the year, one Sunday, day of the festival of the sacrifices (August 26 1528), a little before the prayer he dethroned his father. 
Askia-El-Hâdj-Mohammed was at that time in the mosalla.
Mousa then swore that no one would pray until he himself had been proclaimed ruler. The prince resigned his
functions in favour of Mousa, who, invested of the royal capacity,
made carry out the prayer of the festival. 
He continued to live in his house, while his father remained in the palace 
from where he did not leave any more during the remainder of his life. 
Askia-El-Hadj-Mohammed reigned for thirty-six years and six months.
