Translated by DeepL with edits from Ayah.

In the year 903 (August 1497 - August 1498) he [Askia Muhammad] undertook an
expedition against Na'asira, the sultan of Mossi. He took with him
the blessed seyyid, Mour-Sâlih-Djaura, inviting him
to give him the necessary indications so that this expedition
was a true holy war made in the way of God.
Mour did not refuse to comply with this order and explained
to the prince all the rules pertaining to the holy war.
The prince of the Believers, Askia-Mohammed, then asked the
seyyid to be his messenger near the sultan of Mossi. The
seyyid accepted this mission; he went to the country of Mossi
and gave the letter of his master who summoned the sultan to embrace Islam.
Before answering, the sultan of Mossi declared that he wanted 
first of all to consult his ancestors who were in
the other world. Consequently, accompanied by his ministers, 
he went to the temple of the idol of the country. For his part
the seyyid also went there in order to see how the dead were summoned.
They began by the customary offerings; then an elderly man appeared.
At the sight of him everyone prostrated themselves; then
the sultan announced the object of his approach. Speaking then
in the name of the ancestors, the old man said: "I will never accept 
such a thing for you. You must, on the contrary,
fight until the last, until you win or they have succumbed."
Then Naʻasira answered the blessed seyyid: "Go back to
your master and tell him that between him and us there can be nothing
there can be nothing but fighting and combat."
He was left alone in the temple with the personage who had appeared in the form of an old man, 
the seyyid addressed him in these terms: "In the name of the mighty God, I ask you to say who you are?"
"I am Iblis," replied the pseudo-old man, "I am leading them astray so that I mislead them 
so that they all die in a state of infidelity."
Mour returned to the prince Askia-El-Ilàdj-Mohammed and gave him an account of all that had happened. 
"Now," he added, "your duty is to fight them." 
Immediately the prince began to fight with them; he killed many men, devastated
their fields, sacked their dwellings, and took their children captive. 
All those, men and women, who were brought back as captives, were the object of the divine blessing.
In the whole region, no other expedition, apart from this one, 
had the character of a holy war made in the way of God.