translated by DeepL
This segment is taken from TimbuktuChronicles/tarikh-al-fattash-eng1.txt 
Original French is from https://hdl.handle.net/2027/wu.89012185690

<pb n="83"/>"
CHAPTER II
Kankan-Moûssa and the empire of Malli.
We are now going to tell in part what it was possible for us to learn
possible to learn about the Malli-koï- Kankan- Moûssa.
Moûssa.
This Malli-Koi was a virtuous, pious and devout king. His
power extended from the extreme borders of the Malli
to Sibiridougou, and all the populations who lived in this territory 
territory recognized his authority, those of the Songai as well as
Songai as well as the others. One of the manifestations of his virtue was
of his virtue was that he freed a slave every day. He
made the pilgrimage to the sacred temple of God and, in the course of
his pilgrimage, he built the great mosque of Timbuktu,
as well
as well as those of Doukoureï, Goundam, Direï, Quanko
Quanko and Bako.
As for Kankan, she was a native woman, (33) although some say she was
although some say that she was of Arab origin. The reason
which determined Kankan-Moûssa to go on a pilgrimage to Mecca was told to me in the manner of tâleb Mohammed Kouma (God have mercy on him!), who possessed a large number of
him!), who had a deep knowledge of the traditions of the ancients.
the ancients. The Malli-koï Kankan-Moûssa, he told me, who
who had caused the involuntary death of his mother Nâna-Kankan,
conceived later of this homicide a great sorrow and
remorse; fearing then the punishment of his fault, he devoted
He devoted large sums of money to alms of money and resolved to fast for the rest of his life.
One of the ulama of his time, to whom he asked how he could obtain forgiveness for this horrible crime, answered: "I am a man of the people.
I am of the opinion that you should seek refuge with the Messenger of God (God shower his blessings on him).

<pb n="85"/>"

blessings upon him and grant him salvation!), that you hasten to him, that you place yourself
to him, place yourself under his protection and ask him to intercede
him to intercede for you with God, and then God will accept his intercession.
will accept his intercession. Such is my opinion".

On the same day, Kankan-Moủssa decided to immediately implement this means and
and set about collecting the necessary money and
the necessary money and to make the preparations for his journey.
for his journey. He called upon the inhabitants of the various points of his empire
to ask them for food and subsidies, then he went to find one of his
and then went to one of his teachers and asked him to tell him
and asked him to tell him which day he should set out. He said, "You must wait
the sheikh replied, "We must wait for a Saturday that falls on the
of a month. That's the day you should leave, and you won't die
not die without first returning to your palace safe and sound
safe and sound, God willing.
So the prince waited and watched for the arrival of this
the arrival of this coincidence during the course of the months, and it was only
nine months after that, the twelfth of the month fell on a Saturday.
Saturday. The emperor, who had remained in his palace in Malli,
then set out, at the moment when the head of his caravan
had already arrived in Timbuktu.
Since that time, the travelers of the country consider
as a happy omen to set out on a Saturday that falls on the
which falls on the twelfth of a month. A proverb has been made about this, and when a traveler returns in a poor state, they say of him
of him: "Here is one who did not leave his home on the Saturday
that the Malli-koï had chosen for his departure".
Kankan-Moûssa left with important forces,
carrying considerable sums of money and at the head of a
army. A tâleb told me that he had learned from our master
master, the very learned càdi Aboulabbâs (r) Sidi Ahmed
<pb n="86"/>"
58
TARIKH EL-FETTACH
ben Ahmed ben Anda-ag-Mohammed (God have mercy on him, be satisfied with him
him, be satisfied with him and show him his satis- faction!
faction!), that, having asked for the number of the
people who accompanied the pasha Ali ben Abdelqâ- der 2 the day he left
the day when he left for Tuat, announcing that he was going on a pilgrimage to
pilgrimage to Mecca, they had answered him that the number of
that the number of armed men that the pasha had with him
him was about eighty. The câdi, after proclaiming the greatness of God and his praises, began to say:
"Everything in this world is going to perish: when Kankan-Moủssa
left here to go on a pilgrimage to Mecca, he had 8,000 men with him
8,000 men with him; the askia Mohammed, who made the pilgrimage
pilgrimage later, had only one tenth of them, i.e. 800;
finally Ali ben Abdelqader, who came after them, had only
only 80, the tenth of 800 ". Then he added: "And still this last one
And he added: "And the latter did not succeed! Let us pay homage to the Supreme Being
who is all powerful.
However, Kankan-Moủssa continued his journey, about which many stories have been told.
about which many anecdotes have been told, most of which are not
are not true, because the mind refuses to admit them.
to admit them. Thus, for example, it is reported that whenever he came across a
he came to cross a city on Friday on his way from Sudan to Egypt
Sudan to Egypt, he did not fail to build a mosque there the same day
same day; it is said that the mosques of the cities of 

<pb n="87"/>"

Goundam and Doukoureï were among those built. At lunch as well as at dinner, from the day he left his palace
from the day he left his palace to the moment he returned, he would not
fresh fish and freshly picked vegetables.
I was told that Kankan-Moủssa had taken with him
his wife named Inâri Konté, accompanied by five
five hundred women and servants. 

[.............]

My master the mớri Boukar ben Sâlih the Ouangarbé (God

<pb n="91"/>"
have mercy on him!) told me that Kankan-Moussa took 
forty mules loaded with gold when he made his pilgrimage to Mecca and visited the tomb of the Prophet.
It is said that he asked the sheikh of the noble and holy
city of Mecca (37) (may God the most high protect it!)
to entrust him with two, three or four cherished members of the
descendants of the Messenger of God (may he shower his blessings on him and
blessings on him and grant him salvation!), so that he could take them to his country
the sight of these people should be a source of blessings for the
to be a source of blessings for the inhabitants of his empire, as well as
of blessings for the inhabitants of his empire, as well as the trace of their steps in these regions.
But the sheikh refused, the unanimous opinion being that it was necessary
that such a thing should be opposed and defended, because of the respect
respect and the respects which one owed to the noble Blood of the
and not to allow one of them to fall into the hands of the infidels, disappearing
to the hands of the infidels, disappeared or went astray. As the
prince persisted in his request and insisted very strongly,
the sheikh finally told him: "I will not do it and I will not give
I will not do it and I will not give orders about it, but I will not forbid it.
Let those who want to follow you do so: it is their business;
as for me, I release my responsibility".
The Malli-koï then made publish by one of his heralds in the mosques
the mosques the following announcement: "That whoever wants
to have one thousand gold mithals follow me in my country; the sum
the sum will be given to him immediately ". He succeeds in attracting
thus four men of the tribe of Qoreïch; but one predicts
that they were freedmen belonging to this tribe
garbe". This last word is the plural form in the Fulani language of the well-known term
Quangara which is used in a large part of the Sudan to designate the Dioula
Dioula and, more generally, the whole of the populations of Mande family
who engage in trade.

<pb n="92"/>"

and not Qoreishites of note. He made them give
4,000 mithqâls, one thousand to each of them, and these Qoreïchites,
accompanied by their families, followed him at the time of his return in his country.
Arrived at Timbuktu, on the return of his voyage, the
Malli-koï gathered boats and dugouts on which they transported
on which they transported his women, as well as the families
and the luggage of the Qoreïchites, until the country of Malli, the
exhausted mounts not being able any more to carry their
horsemen. When they reached the city of Kami
pirogues which carried the cherished ones come with the prince of the
of the noble city of Mecca, the Dienné-koï and the kouran
attacked the flotilla and plundered all that it contained;
they, made the cherif disembark near them and declared themselves
in revolt against the Malli-Koi. But, when they had
learned, by the account of the masters of the boats, the history
of the cherif and their high situation, they presented themselves to them,
treated them with much respect and installed them
in a nearby place called Chinchin 3. It is said that



<pb n="93"/>"
CHAPTER II
65
the cheriffs of the city of Kayi or Kai are descended from these
Qoreishites.
Here ends the travel report relating to the pilgrimage of the Malli-koï Kankan-Moủssa.
As for the Dienné-koï, he was one of the most humble servants
servants of the Malli-Koi and one of his most
and one of his lowest ranking officials. It will suffice for you to realize this,
to know that he was only admitted in the presence of his wife,
that is, the wife of the Malli-Koi, to whom he paid
that he paid the tax for the region of Dienné and that he never
that he never saw the Malli-Koi. 38 Praise be to Him
to Him who honors and humbles, who raises and lowers!
OBSERVATION. If you ask what difference there is
between Mallinké and Ouangara, know that
that the Quangara and the Mallinké are of the same origin, but that Mallinké is used
to designate warriors, whereas Onangara is used to designate 
traders who peddle their wares from country to country.
As for Malli, it is the name of a vast region occupying
territory and containing cities and towns.
towns and villages. The authority of the Sultan of Malli extends over the whole
country in an absolute and tyrannical way. We have heard
say
by the mass of our contemporaries that there are in the world
four sultans, not including the supreme sultan (i.e. the
the emperor of Constantinople), namely the sultan of Baghdad, 
he Sultan of Cairo, the Sultan of Boruou and the Sultan of Malli.
